In order for plants to grow they need
imports of carbon dioxide,water and energy.
The chemical process by which plants use
these resources to manufacture glucose
the building blocks of plants, is called
photosynthesis.
In the process oxygen gas is produced as a byproduct.
The energy for photosynthesis originates
in the sun
and arrives at the earth as sunlight.
This light has both a wave and a
particle nature.
The particles or photons are the
smallest units of light.
Photons oscillates along a path which is
measured as wavelengths.
The light emitted from the sun contains
photons in a wide spectrum of wavelengths,
called the electromagnetic spectrum.
Photosynthetic organisms use only a
small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called visible light.
Photosynthetic organisms contain
pigments that facilitate the capture of wavelengths of light
in the visible light range.
The color of a pigment comes from the
wavelengths of light reflected.
Plants appear green because they reflect
yellow and green wavelengths of light.
Red and blue wavelengths of light are
absorbed by these pigments,
and provide the energy that is used for
photosynthesis
Within eukaryotic photosynthetic
organisms, also known as photoautotrophs,
the chemical reactions of photosynthesis
occur within plant cells
in specialized structures known as
chloroplasts.
Photosynthesis consists of two sets of
reactions -
the light dependent reactions and the
Calvin cycle.
Within the chloroplast are small disc
like structures called thylakoids,
which are surrounded by a fluid-filled space called the stroma.
The reactions that synthesize glucose:
the Calvin cycle - occur in the stroma.
The light dependent reactions occur in
the thylakoid.
It is here that conversion of light
energy to chemical energy is initiated.
In most photosynthetic organisms thylakoid
contain pairs of photosystems
called photosystem I and photosystem II
that work in tandem to produce the
energy that will later be used in the stroma to manufacture sugars.
The photosystems of the thylakoid
consist of
a network of accessory pigment molecules and
chlorophyll -
the molecules that absorb the photons of light.
Within the pigment molecules, the absorbed
light energy excites electrons to a higher state.
Photosystems will channel the excitation energy
gathered by the pigment molecules to
a reaction center chlorophyll molecule,
which will then pass the electrons to a
series of proteins
located on the final thylakoid membrane.
Photons of light strike photosystems
I & II simultaneously.
We will examine what happens with the
photon striking photosystem II first.
The energized electrons are passed from
the reaction center of photosystem II
to an electron transport chain.
The electrons lost by photosystem II
are replaced by a process called
photolysis,
which involves the oxidation of a water
molecule
producing free electrons and oxygen gas.
While this oxygen gas is a byproduct of
photosynthesis,
it is an important input to the
cellular respiration pathways.
As electrons passed through the electron
transport chain,
the energy from the electron is used to
pump hydrogen ions from the stroma
to the thylakoid, creating a
concentration gradient.
This gradient powers a protein called
ATP synthases,
which phosphorylate ADP to form ATP.
The low-energy electrons leaving
photosystem II
are shuttled to photosystem I.
Within photosystem one I energy electrons
are reenergized
and are passed through an electron
transport chain,
where they are used to reduce the electron carrier NADP+ to NADPH.
When the chloroplast is receiving a
steady supply of photons,
NADPH and ATP molecules
are rapidly being provided to the
metabolic pathways in the stroma
Therefore the ATP and NADPH form during
the light dependent reactions
are used in the stroma to fuel the
Calvin cycle reactions.
The Calvin cycle consists of a series of
reactions
that reduce carbon dioxide to produce
the carbohydrate glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
The cycle consists of three steps: the
first of which is carbon fixation.
In this step carbon dioxide is attached
to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
resulting in a six carbon molecule that
splits into two three carbon molecules.
The second step is a sequence of
reactions using electrons from NADPH and some of the ATP to reduce carbon dioxide.
In the final step ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate is regenerated.
For every three turns of the cycle, five
molecules of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
are used to reform three molecules of
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate.
The remaining glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is then used
to make glucose, fatty acids or glycerol.
It takes two molecules of
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
to make one molecule of glucose
phosphate.
Thus, the Calvin cycle has to run six
times to produce one molecule of glucose.
These molecules can remove their
phosphate and add fructose to form sucrose.
The molecule plants used to transport
carbohydrates throughout their system.
Glucose phosphate is also the starting
molecule for the synthesis of starch and
cellulose.
Plants produce sugars to use as storage
molecules and structural components for their own
benefit.
By utilizing the energy of the Sun, along
with inputs of water and carbon dioxide, plants act as glucose factories.
Photosynthetic organisms are the primary
producers on glucose on the planet.
They also produce oxygen gas as a
byproduct
and thus served as the foundation of life,
providing food and oxygen
for the complex food webs on both land
and in the oceans